Hello and welcome to this Gartner webinar, Transforming Communications for an AI-enabled World.
You're tasked with driving a stronger performance on your organization's mission critical priorities.
To do that, you need trusted guidance that provides clarity and not just information.
At Gartner, we deliver that clarity by combining forward-looking insights from our two thousand five hundred experts with rigorous proprietary research methodologies.
Our perspective is uniquely informed by our hands-on work with 500,000 client interactions across every major function, geography, industry and sector.
We don't just provide the business and technology insights, we work with you to apply them, equipping your team with practical tools and expert guidance to achieve your goals.
So whether you're new to Gartner or one of our existing clients, today you'll get actionable objective insights rooted in human intelligence to help you move forward with confidence.
To give you time to review them.
Around the video player, you'll find a variety of ways to interact with the session, and we encourage you to participate by clicking the ask a speaker box to submit your questions and thoughts throughout this program.
You can either submit a question anonymously or if you choose your name, title and company can be visible along with your question.
Navigate to the bottom of the page to download additional resources, and throughout the program you can rate the session and share feedback.
To submit your rating, locate the rate session link below the player.
A box will open for you to select one to five hearts and please note that five is our top rating and share your feedback on the insights provided in the leafover for feedback box and click send.
This webinar is being recorded.
You can watch this presentation again and find more great insights on demand at gartner.com/slash webinars.
Now I'd like to welcome Gartner Senior Director Analyst Paul Catherwood and Director and Research Emily L.
Paul and Emily, thanks so much for joining us.
And now I'll turn it over to you.
Thanks, Amanda, and hi Emily.
Okay, well, as Amanda said, I'm Paul Catherwood, and today our topic is to talk about uh transforming the comms function for an AI-enabled world.
And we know that as comms leaders, you are facing some pretty challenging questions when it comes to AI in terms of how it's augmenting your work, but also in terms of how it's really changing the value proposition for the comms function.
And so our goal today is to is to ask and answer some of those questions and to share some of the some of the insights that we've been deriving from our research and also our conversations, which seem to be just escalating uh all the time with with clients about the topic of AI.
And just to set expectations, we're not going to have all the answers.
This is such a rapidly evolving space, um, and we are trying to stay ahead of it just like you are.
But before we get started, we wanted to get to know you a little bit better.
So go to the chat if you will and introduce yourself.
Tell us your name and your company and include one word to describe how you're feeling about AI.
Now, Paul, there you should uh everyone should be able to find the chat in the right-hand uh menu of the platform.
I can voice over some of what we're seeing start to come through.
Uh I see eager, curious.
A lot of curious.
A lot of curious, exactly.
Uh so people are finding the chat.
Keep the comments coming as we get started on the channel.
Absolutely.
Eager.
A lot of positivity, which is awesome, hopeful, awesome, excited.
Yeah.
Nice.
Thanks for everybody.
Thanks for playing.
Thanks for playing at home.
We appreciate it.
So it's not surprising.
So all of this, so a lot of energy in the chat now, it's really picking up.
Um, and maybe some of that energy is keeping you up at night.
I know sometimes it's keeping me up at night, but I will tell you some of the questions we're getting from our clients, and I've summarized them here.
But what are the biggest AI driven challenges and opportunities I should be aware of for the future of my function?
Uh, which AI use cases, vendors, tools should I prioritize?
Uh, what are the skills and culture I need in my team to succeed?
Uh, how do I redesign my operating model to capitalize on the opportunities?
And how do I use the benefits of AI to redefine the comms value proposition?
So we're gonna address some of these, some of them, some of them head on, some of them indirectly in our conversation today.
Um, definitely ask questions as you go.
And as I'm talking, Emily's gonna monitor the chat and she'll some of those questions and link them in the conversation, and then we'll also have time at the end to address your questions as well.
But here's just a look at what we're going to cover today.
So we're going to start with just a summary of the current state of play as we're seeing it here at Gartner for AI and communications, and a lot of that will be derived from data that we've pulled from our CCO spend survey, which we conduct on an annual basis.
So getting an understanding of where CCOs are allocating their resources relative to really the survey covers all aspects of comms, but in particular, we're going to pull out some of the data related to AI investments.
And then we're also going to talk about an approach for transformation that we've been talking about with clients and is really resonating with them.
So let's get started.
And I'll give you some top line perspective, and then Emily is going to take us through the uh some of some of the the more detailed line items from the from the survey.
But we know from what we're hearing from from comms leaders is is that AI is certainly transforming the function in some way already today uh we're seeing it uh modify roles somewhat we're seeing it modify workflows um we're not necessarily however seeing the delivery on that great narrative promise that's out there that somehow AI is going to change the world and have immediate ROI what we're hearing from many CCOs about half uh is that it's Gen AI hasn't necessarily delivered the outcomes they expected maybe a year ago um and at the same time they're feeling pressure from above from the C-suite to deliver uh clear ROI and our position on this is that we're at a moment where CCOs really need to move beyond the isolated use case to look toward a more unified strategy thinking about their entire operating model and thinking about their workflows and inserting AI at those points in the in the workflows where they can have the highest benefit the least amount of risk to deliver a different value proposition for the function one that is much more forward focused and proactive as opposed to reactive.
So Emily do you want to take us through some of the specific data?
I'd love to thanks Paul so at the turn of every year Gartner has launched a CCO spend survey to gather to gather data from comms leaders this past year we focused on North America and Europe and we had about 200 respondents.
And so I'm gonna move through a set of slides now to help you level set with how your peers as communications leaders are feeling about AI and are sort of looking to the future with AI.
So you can use the data in the next few slides to benchmark to understand where you are and to influence resourcing decisions in your organization.
So we can see here, starting with budget, that currently our comms leaders told tell us that they're spending about 5.7% of their budgets on AI related resources.
They expect this spending to jump up to 8.8% for the next fiscal year.
So that's a 54% increase in the share of total budget allocated to AI for comms.
But looking in that gray box to the right, this prediction might prove to be optimistic, still to be determined.
But a look back to the data from last year shows us that comms leaders similarly projected a big rise in spending for AI, but it didn't actually materialize.
Investment grew by about 20%, which is moderate.coms leaders are facing when it comes to AI.
So we're also seeing from the same survey talent, employee anxiety, and audience skepticism as big challenges.
So let's start actually from the bottom here.
The bottom two bars are related when we look closely.
So on the very bottom, and I know it's small print, I'll voice it over.
More than half of comms leaders agree that their functions must address significant audience skepticism about generative AI, which is to say the public jury is proving quite slow to trust almost any use of AI.
And moving up to the middle bar, similar sentiment among employees.
More than two-thirds agree of comms leaders agree that employee anxiety about AI poses a significant risk to enterprise success over the next two years.
So employee anxiety isn't just like a nice to have nice to address problem anymore.
It's uh having real business impact.
So those two bottom bars are about resistance to change among audiences.
And this isn't actually an evergreen issue that we've seen we've seen for years popping up before COVID, after the pandemic.
And we have some very practical frameworks and tools on Gartner.com to help address obstacles to behavior change among audiences.
So if those two bars ring true for you, reach out to schedule a conversation with Gartner.
But for today, it's that top bar that I actually want to dive, we're gonna spend more time on and we'll dive into a little bit.
Most, so reading the top bar, you can see the dark blue and the second color blue.
Most comms leaders agree that they need to update their talent strategy and skill sets to get value out of AI.
And the question there is what do we mean by updating?
The good news for comms teams is that among the survey takers, our comms leaders are not planning on reducing headcount as a part of that change.
Looking at the top bar, we see that comms leaders agree that the main goal of comms tech and AI investments is to enable staff to focus on higher value strategic work.
And looking at the bottom bar, just as many agree that the goal of AI investments is reducing workloads and improving efficiency without reducing headcount.
So we're going to come back to talk more about the question of talent a little bit later in the presentation.
I want to show you just one more piece of the puzzle regarding the current state of play for AI and communications, which is use case prevalence.
So in just a minute, we're going to ask you to share with us again, this time through a poll, how you are currently using AI from the among the top few of these options.
But if you read down the list of use cases on the left, we're you'll see that we're not including the most obvious communications use of text generation.
This is pretty ubiquitous at this point.
And so at Gartner, we're more interested in the less common, but as you can see, increasingly common use cases that are bringing value to comms functions.
We're seeing a much broader variety of use cases in action for AI in comms than we were just a year ago.
So reading just the top few bars, you can see that more than half of survey respondents said that their teams are currently using AI for data analysis and reporting, for media monitoring and insights, and for content workflow optimization.
So those are the darkest blue parts of the data.
The second color is planning to implement in the next year.
And so when you look at the two darkest shades of blue, you can see that for nearly every use case presented here, most comms teams are planning on implementing these use cases within the next year.
So of course, with all things AI related, uh data changes quickly.
So we wanna hear from you.
Um just a level set among your peers about what you're hearing.
Amanda, do you mind talking us, talking everybody through where they can find the poll?
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
So as Emily said, uh the poll is poll is now open, and we want to know what you're thinking.
So you should see the poll pop right up over the slides.
In case you can't see the poll on your screen, refresh your browser window.
And once the poll is visible, simply select the answer of your choice and click submit.
Uh once the poll is closed, we're gonna display the results for everyone to see in the video player.
All right, thank you.
So, which common AI use case, which increasingly common a year ago, they weren't maybe as common, increasingly common AI use case is currently providing the greatest value for your team.
We've limited the options here to just the top three on the last slide: data analysis and reporting, media monitoring insights, and content workflow optimization.
We've also got options here for haven't yet implemented these or haven't yet found value in these, which is sadly something we are hearing.
Um while you're while you're figuring out your answer, Paul, I'm gonna pass it back to you.
Curious to hear your thoughts on um what you've been hearing from your conversations with clients.
Well, before I do that, uh Emily, I do want to um just address a question that came up in the chat.
I thought it was a good one.
Uh Rick, thanks for asking this.
He asked, is this spending on the survey, is it on technology and platform?
Is it on technology platforms and resources or consulting?
Um, I think it's actually on the former on platforms and resources, Rick.
Um, but Emily, can you confirm that?
I can, yeah.
That's that's right.
Um, Paul, we have a separate answer option for agency and external support.
So agency or consulting would have fallen into a different category that wasn't labeled as AI.
Yeah.
Well, and it's and it's interesting.
You ask this the question you asked about you know, what am I hearing from clients around the use case?
It's interesting.
So we had a group of about 60 heads of comms in Chicago uh during a local peer briefing where we talked about this topic.
Um we had obviously many who were in the in the content generation or content optimization space.
Um fewer and fewer in more of the analytics space.
And I and I think the the one hand that I think grabbed everybody's attention was um narrative intelligence, which was pretty far down on the list that you put up on the screen.
We obviously we'll talk about it a little bit later when you get into the uh but narrative intelligence, which is one that I'm super excited about.
Um, and then the other the other one that I've been talking to more and more clients about are the use of personas or synthetic audiences for testing uh messaging, um which is again kind of a an emerging discussion, I think, this year.
Yeah.
Well, it looks like thank you all for participating in the chat.
It looks like we had some findings come in and content workflow optimization is coming in as the most valuable among this group.
I love hearing that.
We can all sort of breathe more clearly, having a little bit of efficiency in our workflows, um, but also pretty high use of or pretty high value being found in data analytics and reporting.
So nice to see uh the data here, and thank you all for participating.
So, Paul, I think I'm passing to you for the discussion.
So we're gonna just at a very high flying level talk about an approach for transformation within your team.
Um, something of almost something of a checklist uh to go through as you're as you're preparing your team for this journey that many of you are already on.
And I think the the good news is about this is that you can kind of parachute in no matter where you are.
Um, but first just kind of what so kind of what we're seeing kind of related a bit, Emily, to your state of play that you just shared with us.
We are definitely seeing this, you know, very strong emphasis on efficiency first.
Um, and that's that's clearly an important play.
And I think easy to measure some of the efficiency gains early, whether it's uh reduction in time spent, whether it's uh the you know fewer people within a workflow uh than maybe what you had previously.
Agency spend is another where we're seeing some picking up on efficiencies.
Um but there is some danger in that in focusing solely on efficiency.
Um I think there's a and I think what we're certainly seeing in our research is there's a there's a potential miss there uh to derive value beyond efficiency.
So it's it's a yes and yes, you can become more efficient and you can rethink the value proposition.
Um, and here's our little flashlight.
So so without planning for that broader evolution of the value proposition, um, many CCOs will potentially get caught in something of an efficiency trap uh where you continue to be this reactive order taking function.
Not to say everybody is in that place today, but there is certainly that, but but at simply at a lower cost than what you were delivering it before.
And our position is that really CCOs need to shift the focus from leveraging AI solely as an efficiency play towards more proactively reshaping the comms value proposition.
And so we've we've thought about this from really kind of from a from an adoption process standpoint.
And I'll take you through a few steps of it.
And we we really like our kind of crawl walk run models here.
And one of the reasons why I think crawl walk run is is effective is it brings the team along.
And I think the intent here is to engage your teams as they're um as they're bringing AI on and engaging the entire team, not just the enthusiasts that you might have on the team.
So step one in this process is to develop a roadmap.
And it's not a static roadmap, it's an evolving roadmap that you're going to come back to with frequency, but important early on to identify the use cases that have the highest value that have the highest feasibility for success, uh, but then also to build something of an ecosystem around that that helps uh early use cases and early pilots succeed within the function.
And that includes setting very clear operating standards, ground rules for use, expectations for use, uh, as well as forums where your teams can talk about what they're learning, how they're applying tools.
Uh these are all super important in terms of uh individual adoption and collective adoption.
And the outcomes that you're really driving for are a unified team approach, reducing resistance to change, which we we all know there's there's naturally going to be some change resistance when adopting new tools, whether it's AI or something else.
Um, and and obviously smoother smoother change management and the ROI early on, um lowering the risk and cost due to structure due to a structured implementation, uh, but then also you can find some early measurable gains that can really bring individuals along and get them excited.
Um and so that's what we that's what we kind of define as our crawl phase.
Uh, where you begin to walk is around up scaling and scaling your work, right?
So at this point, we really feel like you're rethinking workflows.
You're you're you're reengineering them and you're re-documenting your workflows.
Um, we recently started to use a term within Gartner that I really like, which is toolmate.
Uh, and Emily, we were talking about this just the other day, this concept of toolmates.
Uh, toolmates being this idea that you know, we are we all have workmates who are our fellow humans in the workplace, and now we are introducing toolmates that we're working alongside.
And so in this phase, it's really being quite thoughtful about how the workmates and the toolmates operate together.
Uh, so the the the interplay of human and AI, um, you'll begin at this phase to rethink your talent strategy, uh, which means thinking what your team can begin to look like over time, how you're thinking about role descriptions, performance management expectations.
Um, and the goal here is to essentially create this future ready function, right?
You're faster, you're smarter.
AI provides the ability for comms to be significantly more analytical and data forward in its approach, which we see as a significant part of the value proposition.
And the goal is really to you now have clear tech enabled productivity.
You have clear points where AI is used and where it is not importantly.
And you're lowering your X external external spend potentially.
Just to give you a quick anecdote on that, I spoke with a head of content and production for a very large medical products firm just a few weeks ago.
She's in the middle of scaling up a pilot across her function and expects to save roughly six and a half million dollars in external agency spend once fully implemented.
And really, because they've they've been taking all that overflow work and sourcing it out to their agencies, and now they'll be able to move it in in-house.
So there's significant gains to be had.
And obviously, depending on the scale of your company, they could be quite large like that.
The third step is elevating the value proposition.
And so this is really where comms is becoming a much more strategic function.
There's we talk about this, but what does it actually mean to be more strategic?
This will be an important conversation over the coming year, right?
Redefining the value proposition.
It is it is really about creating a much more data focused organization that is reading signals in the marketplace, coming not just with solutions to existing problems, but coming with opportunities to share the corporate narrative potentially in places or in ways that it hasn't been done before based on what the data might be telling you.
And really being involved in enterprise decision making in a way that comms has not been in the past.
And the the return on the investment here is the head of comms is more influential across the C across the C suite.
And it's focused the function itself is focused on higher much higher value enterprise initiatives as opposed to more reactive firefighting.
And just to click down a bit into some of the tactics that align with with these, I'll just spend a couple of minutes on this.
I spoke about many of these already, but in step one, as you're developing a roadmap, it's about identifying those use cases, uh setting guidelines, uh, appointing champions within your team who can who can lead adoption and serve as a role model, but also setting the very clear expectation, this is not just something for the champions.
This is this is an expectation for all, uh, and establishing those important forums for feedback.
In the upskilling and scaling, we mentioned this.
It's it is about thinking through workflows, reevaluating them, rewriting them, uh, perhaps testing now more advanced use cases.
So if you've been doing content creation with some with some effect, do you bring in now testing and monitoring tools?
Do you bring in now narrative intelligence tools?
Um, this would be the time to begin to pilot those those opportunities and always uh monitoring for adoption, gathering feedback from your team and from your stakeholders.
And then the final step, as you it's really about repositioning comms as strategic partner.
Really important here, you're gonna have to sit down and rewrite or renegotiate your service level agreements with partners.
So that will be an important activity at this phase as you begin to offer a different level of service, different level of value to the organization.
So for the rest of our conversation today, we're gonna focus on a few of these.
So Emily is going to spend some time on use cases.
We'll definitely spend some time there.
And I think we're beginning to see more and more conversations, very large public conversations about the talent, about the talent problem.
Let's call it that.
And then we'll also talk about positioning comms as a strategic partner.
In fact, that's probably the best place to start is to start with how to position comms as a strategic partner, but actually having that vision in mind.
Or should I keep going?
I think is going to be better addressed when I use cases and a few others, a few others that I think can wait until our QA session at the end.
They're really important.
But I think we're I think we're good to keep moving for now.
Sounds great.
So without, you know, without question, your value proposition should be your true north.
So, you know, as with any journey, you want to start by understanding what your destination is.
So as you're adopting new tools, AI-enabled tools into your workflows, and as you begin to rethink your operating model and your talent, you need to be building towards something.
And where we are today, it's interesting, right?
So we've it's it's something of an existential threat for the comms function.
The AI tools, um, not surprisingly, particularly the LLMs, which have been out and in our workplace now for some time, uh, certainly democratize so much of the work that had typically been done by the communications function.
And it became it creates this blurry area in the middle.
But let me just orient you to this slide.
So on the far left, we've got these kind of typically comms-led activities, strategy announcements, major change communications and campaigns, crisis management, crisis messaging, uh, executive messaging, press releases, all of that stuff very clearly within the comms camp.
Um, and towards the far right, you've got the stuff that hopefully uh you know has been led by the business in the past and will continue to be led by the business, minor change announcements, customer communications, general emails, you know, within business groups.
Um, but what we're beginning to see now is this blurry, blurry boundary in the middle where we've got quite a lot of activity that could be done by comms or could be democratized back to the business, and maybe in some instances should be democratized back towards the business.
And we're not going to certainly answer this, but this is this is what you will need to grapple with is is looking at this work and understanding what stays, what has the highest value, and what can be pushed back to the business or or given back to the business, assuming it's also enabled with the proper tools, guidance, et cetera.
As that democratization of tactic occurs, and you can see on this slide, we've listed out kind of critical capabilities of the comms function, what can be atrophied a bit, and what needs to be built up, what needs to be strengthened.
And so you can see on the far left tactical content creation, right?
This these requests that you're constantly getting for the tactical messaging, much of that can be deemphasized over time, or certainly we think should be deemphasized over time, with a renewed emphasis on strategic content partnering, uh, really planning content against strategy, being a coach to your business partners, being a connector within an organization, right?
Being a not just a people connector, but a systems connector within the organization.
And then operating as a strategic business partner across all across all areas of the C suite.
And we think this is going to be driven by again, kind of a much richer richer handle on data that that uh AI tools will enable, uh, much richer handle on signals that are happening in the marketplace.
Uh, and we'll talk a bit about that more when when Emily gets into the use cases.
So, some quick recommendations.
Um create a vision for an evolved comms value proposition.
That's that's number one, and begin to map that out with your team today.
Because again, you want to have that destination in mind.
And then begin to proactively redefine that with your stakeholders, right?
So this should be a conversation not just within your team, but obviously with your critical stakeholders in the C-suite as you begin to think about what the what the organization looks like for what does the organization need going forward?
And then you begin to build the capabilities, both from a technical standpoint, but also from a human standpoint.
Emily, I'm gonna hand it over to you.
Yeah, Paul, happy to jump back in here.
So I'm gonna take us back to the crawl stage that Paul was was talking through about use case identification and prioritization.
Um there have been some questions that came into the chat that I'll I'll just quickly address now in terms of specific use cases.
And I saw two that I wanted to call out.
One was about what do we mean by content workflow optimization, which was in our first poll.
Um, this is the making, you know, um thinking about linking content ideation to drafting to delivery, uh, with all the stages of approval, brand alignment, uh managed risk.
Um technically, this could be as small as suggesting an approver's name in the document you're working on, knowing which approval, which person needs to be tagged in to the document next.
Uh but it there are content management platforms uh that like this kind of use case is likely to be integrated into.
This wouldn't be a standalone new thing that you buy.
It's more like pay attention to what is being updated by the vendors that you're already engaging with.
So when we talk about content workflow optimization, it's likely sneaking into your systems whether you are aware of it or not at this point.
And then the other question I saw a question come in about vibe coding on comms team on comms teams.
Last year's uh use case assessment for communications had web coding as one of the use cases that we found lower lower to medium value and lower value, higher feasibility would be there this year, but we still found low value and a kind of mismatch with most of the comms clients that we deal with at Gartner.
So there are many use case assessments across Gartner that would include things like vibe coding.
I actually don't know I don't know that they're calling it vibe coding on our Gartner assessment, but we haven't found it necessary within most of the comms functions that we're speaking with but that would be org dependent for you.
So let me let me jump back into our thoughts on building the roadmap for use cases.
So one of the most actionable important parts of your roadmap will be defining what you want to prioritize.
What are the important things for your function to deliver business value for your org.
So I I led a team of Gartner analysts last year and this year, I'm building this use case assessment for communications.
We keep it up to date based on the evolving tech landscape.
And the latest iteration was just published last month.
So I'm going to move quickly through the next few slides to give you a taste of the research available on gartner.com.
There won't be time to read everything on the slides.
But it's meant to give you a picture of what's possible now.
This the feasibility feasibility assessment is about what's possible now and what value you might find within the next 18 months from adopting these use cases.
So the first thing I want to show you is the spread of blue arrows here.
Our list of 18 use cases covers the full range of comms activities, not just content creation, which is one of those columns.
Reading across the top blue bar, we're talking about audience insights, content creation, content delivery, analysis and evaluation.
So we encourage you to start as a leader in communications by thinking about that big picture of your content workflow and of your the workflow of your full function, how you work with partners across your organization.
Ask yourself where automation might be most valuable.
Speaking of value, our assessment of these use cases revolves around value and feasibility dimensions.
So looking at a moment, just to orient you to the page across the labels in in the dark blue across the top.
For value, we measure things like efficiency and effect on risk.
And for feasibility, we measure technical, internal, and external buy-in factors.
So I recommend skimming your eye down the vertical columns.
You can see, as Paul mentioned earlier, we're seeing a ton of efficiency gains and potential for efficiency gains.
So those are big circles under underneath efficiency.
But if we look further to the right at the technical column, for technical feasibility, we see more moderate assessment, more medium bubbles, telling us that in this particular moment, each of these use cases still needs a lot of fine-tuning when you're actually implementing them.
And this brings us to our final analysis.
I'm going to call out some of the specifics here in a minute.
Some AI use cases for communications fall into the calculated risks category on the left, but most fall into the likely wins category.
Calculated risks are lower on the feasibility scale, that's the x-axis.
And it's likely going to be dependent on whether your organization sees more benefit than risk as to whether you should try to implement those.
But the likely wins score high on both feasibility and business value.
And I want to call out just a few of the top right cases.
Paul, you um mentioned a few of these earlier.
Synthetic audience message testing right at the top.
This is, you know, that on-demand gut check before content launch, where we used to have to find a group of a small group of an audience who we might be able to test something with if they signed an NDA for many messages for major changes.
This is not possible.
We can now do this in a safe space, uh, test our test our content before sending it out.
Personalization, the second bullet down, is it finally time for comms to break the curse of information irrelevance if we can personalize messages to a greater extent as marketing has been doing for years.
Better than just talking through all of these in the abstract, I want to show you again just a peek.
It's going to be more information than we can talk through on the slide, but just a peek at what some of these use cases look like in action.
Hey Emily, real quick, a a question popped up what is narrative intelligence?
Can we just spend just a minute on that?
Because we mentioned it earlier and we said we'd come back to it.
Why why don't you take that one Paul?
Yes, please.
Yeah, and what so what we're seeing and and there are there are vendors out there that are positioning themselves really in in almost a a threat warning mode, right?
So it's what are the it's it's looking out into the conversations that are happening whether it's on social media, in chat rooms, uh even in traditional media and understanding what are the conversations that are happening that are relevant to you obviously with inputs from you to understand do you want to be aware of conversations that are happening about your company?
Are there specific topical conversations that you're interested in?
And right now these tools are really positioned as a way to help you use use something of a threat radar, right?
Is there risk on the horizon that you need to be aware of relative to your corporate narrative or relative to narratives that may impact your industry I think there's a flip side to it where you can also spot conversations that could potentially be opportunities opportunities for you to lean in to a conversation to give a company point of view on topic.
So it's it's sits alongside it's certainly related to tools like media monitoring, but it's it's really thinking beyond that.
It's thinking about you know specific conversations that might be happening that you need to be aware of.
And we're seeing, thanks, Paul.
And we are seeing an emerging vendor market that is offering standalone narrative intelligence tools.
For some time, I think we were calling them disinformation intelligence.
Right.
Uh we've the market and we at Gartner have sort of transformed to settle on narrative intelligence because it's not always a deficient defensive posture.
I think as you you rightfully called out, all there is a proactive element to it as well.
Uh good call out on that question.
Keep keep interrupting me if if more come through on use cases.
Um but I want to quickly I I see we're we're coming up on time, so I'm gonna go quickly through these use case examples, calling your attention to just a few bullets.
Our first example of AI use cases in action for communications is from Lenovo, who's using AI to efficiently create tailored content at scale.
This might be familiar to many of you.
Um so looking down the left side of the page about what they were doing, what their situation was, the commercial selling messaging team had a manual process for tailoring content to customer needs and was looking for a better way to scale.
They partnered with the LLM specialists at their vendor to set up a daisy chain of fine-tuned Gen AI models that could pull specific information from databases and produce output that accurately represented the seller's needs.
Note that there was a question that came in about agentic AI.
Um they're not actually referring to this internally as a Gentech AI, they're daisy chaining use cases together in a way that is very similar to it.
Uh that's I think a a key, a key takeaway here.
Um, but I want to actually bring your attention to the bottom right, the second bullet from the bottom.
Production time dropped from eight weeks to mere seconds for the customization of these customer materials.
And they achieved this by partnering with their vendor to just add just a little bit of X LLM expertise and customize what they needed out of the generate gen AI tools they already had.
This is the the reason I'm the emphasis I'm trying to place here is that this is very possible for most of us to do with relatively low uh basic AI investment if we properly know how to train our LLMs and sort of set up the use cases.
So one more example like this about training or customizing the model for what you need.
Um Hitachi Energy uses a home-built LLM platform that they've trained on company content to strategically plan and execute communications.
So they're really using this home-built platform for everything.
Brainstorming, again, I saw a comment come through in the chat about how idea generation is one of the best.
This is my personal favorite use of AI, idea generation, brainstorming partner generating content, but Hitachi is using it for also generating content, project planning and event agendas, research.
They keep a library of prompts to continually improve upon and are constantly looking for tasks to automate.
Importantly though, last bullet on the left, human eyes still ensure the quality of content for every output.
So there is a human in the loop for all the output.
Um and as far as requirements go, this is a heavier lift than the last slide we saw.
You can see that the key teams, uh, that middle section includes an AI team within the larger tech organization, which trains the proprietary platform.
So if you are on a smaller team without such robust organizational support, Gartner has a great resource for helping you helping any comms leader manage the customization of an LLM depending on your resource levels all on your own.
So let's pull back up quickly for a poll check before I need to pass it off to Paul for time.
So next last poll for us.
What AI use case are you most excited about implementing next among again?
We have a short list here among those that we've heard excitement about from others.
Synthetic audience messaging and personalization, narrative intelligence, we've touched on a bit, the time and trend informed planning, I think is the one we haven't actually defined for you yet.
Um that is uh the idea of planning a communications campaign or your entire annual plan based on external and internal information that you choose to feed the LLM, you as a communications leader.
So this um uh trend informed planning should be something that is sort of a use case at the leadership level, um, is what we're seeing there.
So um I know this uh this was a lot of talk of use cases.
We're about to wrap up and move on to talent, but let's see the results of that poll.
All right, got a nice sort of spread across everything we offered.
I like seeing that.
Um, trend informed planning is an interesting one.
It's I know that uh one of our colleagues recently did a research note on that topic, which which I thought was great.
Um, and then it you mentioned kind of daisy chaining multiple tools, which the trend informed planning certainly does that as well, and it potentially will rely on something like a narrative intelligence tool to feed data to feed insights into a decision-making tool that can think about like where where are the issues that we need to focus our plan for the year, and then it would even spit out an actual potential plan.
Yeah.
All right.
Uh, I think I have one quick wrap-up slide.
Um, before passing back to you, Paul, let I'll just briefly as a recap of prioritizing AI use cases.
Remember to continually continually reevaluate the tools you're already using.
Like I said, actually, vendors might be sneaking in some really beneficial use cases that you haven't noticed.
Um, you also might need to uh change your ComStech stack when thinking about um what AI investments you need to make.
Number two, consider adopting use cases that Gardner's identified as high value.
Think outside the box of content creation.
And thirdly, we didn't spend much time on this, but it did come up in that human in the loop.
Don't forget to be slow and careful with using AI for external audience content because of that audience skepticism that we still know exists in the world.
So back to you, Paul.
Yeah, great point.
Um, I'll just spend a few minutes on this because I know we want to open it up to some of the questions that have been coming through.
Um, but it's, and we mentioned this earlier: AI transformation requires talent transformation too.
And there are, I saw a couple of questions come up in the feed relative to this.
But it's clear, like AI, with AI, work is changing, and it's working in it's changing in a few different ways.
We're actually borrowing this from our HR practice, and it's a nice model that I really like to think about.
But there are there are ways in which AI is augmenting our work.
There are ways in which it is re-engineering our work.
So, for example, think you know, we've all kind of been on the on the receiving end of customer service experience platforms that have been significantly re-engineered with the with the use of of AI.
Um, and and also down the road, I think we're going to begin to see kind of the reinvention of work or completely new ways of working.
Um, some of our colleagues within the marketing practice are now looking at what doesn't what does an automated marketing function look like?
Kind of an always on, uh, which is a great example of uh a reinvented or or completely new way of thinking about how a function can work.
And as the as the work evolves, it's very important to begin thinking about how do the roles evolve within your team.
And similar to to the work evolving, there are roles that will be augmented, there are roles that will be engineered, and there are there are roles that you may not have today that you will need tomorrow.
And we're already beginning, we're we're beginning to see that play out in some of our functions.
And I think this can be viewed in some ways as a progression, but it in I think in reality, this may be happening in in equal parts or in or in different parts at any given time.
Um augmentation, reengineering, and inventing.
And it's important to plan for that.
And one of the methodologies that I think is helpful now to do with teams is to actually sit down, pull out existing role descriptions with your associates and begin to look at okay, with the tools we have today or with the tools that we're planning to implement in the future, what responsibilities within the role description can be allowed to atrophy?
What responsibilities do you need to lean into?
And these are important questions to be asking today, and actually doing that red line exercise on role descriptions, on performance expectations to really understand.
And in the future, core skills like writing may not be as important as they have been in the past within the comms function.
However, storytelling becomes particularly important.
The ability to understand good content versus just nicely written content, right?
We know the LLMs are very effective at producing things that sound feasible, but are they accurate?
Do they represent the brand appropriately?
Do they take into account the strategic context and business acumen that we need our people to bring?
So that higher order, those higher order skills will be absolutely incredible, uh incredibly important.
The next step is thinking about the talent pipeline as well.
And we know the pipeline is changing.
I saw a mental model recently that one of our colleagues created that essentially took the position that the broadly speaking, organizations will begin to morph over time from having a uh an employee base that's looks like a pyramid with a very large entry-level population at the bottom.
Uh, and it will morph over time to something more more akin to a diamond.
Um, and that has significant implications from a talent pipeline standpoint.
Uh, as you think about how are you developing people, what roles are you hiring in?
How are you moving people into more strategic roles faster?
Uh, this will all be critical for us to grapple with both at the enterprise level but also at within the college level.
Um, and as I mentioned earlier, planning for the emerging skills and training those skills now.
Right.
I mean, I think we've we've heard from many of our clients that they've already spent time thinking about things like prompt engineering, et cetera.
Those are important skills to have.
There's no question you want people to be effective at using the tools uh to get the most out of them.
And now it's about moving on beyond that.
Data and analytics becomes much more important.
Um being able to frame projects within a more strategic uh within a strategic positioning will become much more important.
Relationship skills obviously become much more important than than perhaps they've ever been.
Um so not to belabor the point, this is certainly an area where we we and and much of our research in the coming year will focus on this.
Paul, I'm gonna um well, I'm gonna I'm gonna jump in for a second because I think I have the next slide, but uh also I just wanted to call out something in the chat.
There have been a few different questions that have come up now about AI as audience, uh, whether that's agenda.
Yeah, you know, the AI or AEO, um answer engine optimization.
I think I'm just gonna quickly say we do Gartner.
The question was does Gartner talk about this?
Are we seeing it outside of marketing and within communications as well?
100%.
And we have some good guidance, some very like practical, step-by-step guidance on how our content processes should change in a way to speak to machine audiences.
But for the sake of time, I'm gonna skip over um one last chat thing we had.
And and just note uh just as Paul was talking about, we completed, we updated our longstanding comms core competencies uh last year to show these new skills that Paul was just referencing.
And so I just want to show you this sort of um lovely graphic that we have uh available on Gartner.com that's calling out those blue boxes, systems thinking, ethical reasoning, digital acumen and content validation, and diplomacy relationships management, in other words, these are the things that AI will not be taking from us um as humans, uh needed on the comms team.
So, Paul, I think um, let's wrap up the next few slides.
Oh, sorry.
Uh I moved past that one.
Well, we are we are beginning to see certainly some investment in this space.
Like so, we talked about reinvention of roles, and one of the roles that's being invented and being adopted with with considerable speed are are things that folks are generally calling an AI specialist role.
Uh, last year, about 24% of our respondents uh indicated that they already had somebody in their team in that in that role.
They'd already hired somebody in.
45% indicated that they were planning to add an AI specialist type of role.
Our view is that if you're going to do this, it's less about finding somebody who can actually just do AI.
It's more of bringing in someone who's focused on leading transformation relative to AI.
And so we've actually seen a number of uh both clients and companies that we've talked to who are who are not clients, um, who are evolved in this space, who are creating roles like this.
It concentrates the accountability for transformation, but it does not um it does not take the responsibility of individuals within the team uh to participate in the change.
It's really much more about moving this forward in a very focused project management fashion.
And I think with that, just one quick summary of recommendations here.
Um, Emily, you had mentioned this prioritizing the high value use cases, um, planning for that intentional human AI task allocation, going through role descriptions and actually rethinking role descriptions, particularly when you're hiring for new roles, uh, planning for that emerging skill development, beginning to implement that, and then continuing to hold your functions value proposition as your true north.
Yeah.
I I am uh grateful to say that I think we still have five minutes, maybe four minutes left for questions.
Um, Paul, I'm just gonna call out I'm I'm organizing them by votes.
If you all in the chat want to vote like Reddit style for the questions you'd like to hear answered.
I'm gonna kick us off with one uh from Pedro about uh who are the trust partners for synthetic audience message testing?
Paul, can you just talk us through that use case a little bit more?
Yeah, so the the um there's a couple of ways to go about this.
One is around one of the ways to go about the authentic or the synthetic message testing is to build your own personas, which would be static, right?
So these would be built through prompts using existing LLMs, and super important uh human in the loop here to understand to understand that the personas that you're building may be prone to bias, they may be prone to hallucination, they're using static data, not dynamic data like big synthetic models.
Um, and therefore it is it it will be important, particularly early on as you're testing these out to test them against real focus groups, real employees to understand whether it's employees or or external.
Uh, but that I think the trust partners, if I'm reading the comp the question correctly, there are clearly humans in the loop that are not just taking the output at face value, but actually thinking through it and and testing these models to get some confidence that they're delivering good feedback.
The larger synthetic models that are coming through third-party vendors are using very large data sets.
They're dynamic, they're constantly being updated with uh with either publicly available data or CRM data that's being brought in from your own systems or HRIS data that's bringing being brought in for your in from your internal systems.
Um, and and actually they're probably less prone to some of the to some of the hallucinations or the or the missteps that might be found in the in the personas, but they still require testing they still require a human in the loop to to to evaluate the output and and bring a sense of uh of judgment to it all right let me let me ask one more question for the chat and then I think we have to pass it over to Amanda um most this one's from Bianca most LLMs and there was a question about LLM large language model it's the it's the machine that we call AI so chat GPT and Copilot and Claude are all LLMs so most LLMs show productivity gains but what metrics should do we see CCOs using and what metrics should CCOs be using to prove to prove value beyond speed comprehension behavior change etc and how do we implement real-time data informed engagement without crossing privacy or ethics lines that's maybe two questions might have time for one 30 second answer and you want me to take it oh yes sorry oh yeah no I think I think well I think it's oh it's all the above it's a great question I think there is a I think we're trending towards a space where the CCO can walk into that conversation with the CEO and have a conversation about what's the narrative health of the company are we are we being understood as we hope to be understood in the marketplace and then what are the correlate what's the corollary data that we can say as that understanding improves as trust related to the organization improves, which you can measure again through through trust barometers, etc.
How is that then impacting sales?
Time to fill roles, right?
Think about think about the really meaty business measurements that are important.
Employee engagement, employee retention, etc.
So there's kind of you you'll need to think across that.
And then also really big one is risk mitigation, right?
Which is a very very important topic for CCOs to think about.
All right.
Amanda, I think we'll pass it back to you.
Thank you everyone for uh listening for this hour.
Yeah thank you so much Paul.
Thank you Emily.
And before you go we've uh included some additional resources at the bottom of the page which I'm just scrolling through now so you'll be able to download those.
A quick reminder that this webinar is being recorded and watch this presentation again and find more great insights on demand at Gartner.com slash webinars.
Lastly please rate this webinar on the bottom of your screen to submit your rating click the hearts below the player box will open for you to select one to five hearts and please note that five is our top rating and share your feedback on the insights provided in the leaf further feedback box and click send.
And with that I'd like to again thank Paul and Emily and of course thanks to you for joining.
Have a great day goodbye